Ad Valorem

    We saw that just payment of labour consisted in a sum of
money which would approximately obtain equivalent labour at a
future time: we have now to examine the means of obtaining such
equivalence. Which question involves the definition of Value,
Wealth, Price, and Produce.
    None of these terms are yet defined so as to be understood by
the public. But the last, Produce, which one might have thought
the clearest of all, is, in use, the most ambiguous; and the
examination of the kind of ambiguity attendant on its present
employment will best open the way to our work.
    In his chapter on Capital,(14*) Mr J.S. Mill instances, as a
capitalist, a hardware manufacturer, who, having intended to
spend a certain portion of the proceeds of his business in buying
plate and jewels, changes his mind, and, 'pays it as wages to
additional workpeople." The effect is stated by Mr Mill to be,
that "more food is appropriated to the consumption of productive
labourers."
    Now I do not ask, though, had I written this paragraph, it
would surely have been asked of me, What is to become of the
silversmiths? If they are truly unproductive persons, we will
acquiesce in their extinction. And though in another part of the
same passage, the hardware merchant is supposed also to dispense
with a number of servants, whose "food is thus set free for
productive purposes," I do not inquire what will be the effect,
painful or otherwise, upon the servants, of this emancipation of
their food. But I very seriously inquire why ironware is produce,
and silverware is not? That the merchant consumes the one, and
sells the other, certainly does not constitute the difference,
unless it can be shown (which, indeed, I perceive it to be
becoming daily more and more the aim of tradesmen to show) that
commodities are made to be sold, and not to be consumed. The
merchant is an agent of conveyance to the consumer in one case,
and is himself the consumer in the other:(15*) but the labourers
are in either case equally productive, since they have produced
goods to the same value, if the hardware and the plate are both
goods.
    And what distinction separates them? It is indeed possible
that in the "comparative estimate of the moralist," with which Mr
Mill says political economy has nothing to do (III. i. 2), a
steel fork might appear a more substantial production than a
silver one: we may grant also that knives, no less than forks,
are good produce; and scythes and ploughshares serviceable
articles. But, how of bayonets? Supposing the hardware merchant
to effect large sales of these, by help of the "setting free" of
the food of his servants and his silversmith, -- is he still
employing productive labourers, or, in Mr Mill's words, labourers
who increase "the stock of permanent means of enjoyment" (I. iii.
4)? Or if, instead of bayonets, he supply bombs, will not the
absolute and final "enjoyment" of even these energetically
productive articles (each of which costs ten pounds(16*)) be
dependent on a proper choice of time and place for their
enfantement; choice, that is to say, depending on those
philosophical considerations with which political economy has
nothing to do?(17*)
    I should have regretted the need of pointing out
inconsistency in any portion of Mr Mill's work, had not the value
of his work proceeded from its inconsistencies. He deserves
honour among economists by inadvertently disclaiming the
principles which he states, and tacitly introducing the moral
considerations with which he declares his science has no
connection. Many of his chapters are, therefore, true and
valuable; and the only conclusions of his which I have to dispute
are those which follow from his premises.
    Thus, the idea which lies at the root of the passage we have
just been examining, namely, that labour applied to produce
luxuries will not support so many persons as labour applied to
produce useful articles, is entirely true; but the instance given
fails -- and in four directions of failure at once-because Mr
Mill has not defined the real meaning of usefulness. The
definition which he has given-" capacity to satisfy a desire, or
serve a purpose" (III. i. 2) -- applies equally to the iron and
silver. while the true definition which he has not given, but
which nevertheless underlies the false verbal definition in his
mind, and comes out once or twice by accident (as in the words
"any support to life or strength" in I. iii. 5) -- applies to
some articles of iron, but not to others, and to some articles of
silver, but not to others. It applies to ploughs, but not to
bayonets; and to forks, but not to filigree.(18*)
    The eliciting of the true definitions will give us the reply
to our first question, "What is value?" respecting which,
however, we must first hear the popular statements.
    "The word 'value,' when used without adjunct, always means,
in political economy, value in exchange" (Mill, III. i. 2). So
that, if two ships cannot exchange their rudders, their rudders
are, in politico-economic language, of no value to either.
    But "the subject of political economy is wealth." --
(Preliminary remarks, page 1)
    And wealth "consists of all useful and agreeable objects
which possess exchangeable value." -- (Preliminary remarks, page
10.)
    It appears, then, according to Mr Mill, that usefulness and
agreeableness underlie the exchange value, and must be
ascertained to exist in the thing, before we can esteem it an
object of wealth.
    Now, the economical usefulness of a thing depends not merely
on its own nature, but on the number of people who can and will
use it. A horse is useless, and therefore unsaleable, if no one
can ride, -- a sword, if no one can strike, and meat, if no one
can eat. Thus every material utility depends on its relative
human capacity.
    Similarly: The agreeableness of a thing depends not merely on
its own likeableness, but on the number of people who can be got
to like it. The relative agreeableness, and therefore
saleableness, of "a pot of the smallest ale," and of "Adonis
painted by a running brook," depends virtually on the opinion of
Demos, in the shape of Christopher Sly. That is to say, the
agreeableness of a thing depends on its relatively human
disposition.(19*) Therefore, political economy, being a science
of wealth, must be a science respecting human capacities and
dispositions. But moral considerations have nothing to do with
political economy (III. i. 2). Therefore, moral considerations
have nothing to do with human capacities and dispositions.
    I do not wholly like the look of this conclusion from Mr
Mill's statements: -- let us try Mr Ricardo's.
    "Utility is not the measure of exchangeable value, though it
is absolutely essential to it." -- (Chap. I. sect. i) essential
in what degree, Mr Ricardo? There may be greater and less degrees
of utility. Meat, for instance, may be so good as to be fit for
any one to eat, or so bad as to be fit for no one to eat. What is
the exact degree of goodness which is "essential" to its
exchangeable value, but not "the measure" of it? How good must
the meat be, in order to possess any exchangeable value; and how
bad must it be -- (I wish this were a settled question in London
markets) -- in order to possess none?
    There appears to be some hitch, I think, in the working even
of Mr. Ricardo's principles; but let him take his own example.
"Suppose that in the early stages of society the bows and arrows
of the hunter were of equal value with the implements of the
fisherman. Under such circumstances the value of the deer, the
produce of the hunter's day's labour, would be exactly equal to
the value of the fish, the product of the fisherman's day's
labour, The comparative value of the fish and game would be
entirely regulated by the quantity of labour realized in each."
(Ricardo, chap. iii. On Value).
    Indeed! Therefore, if the fisherman catches one sprat. and
the huntsman one deer, one sprat will be equal in value to one
deer but if the fisherman catches no sprat, and the huntsman two
deer, no sprat will be equal in value to two deer?
    Nay but -- Mr Ricardo's supporters may say -- he means, on an
average, -if the average product of a day's work of fisher and
hunter be one fish and one deer, the one fish will always be
equal in value to the one deer.
    Might I inquire the species of fish? Whale? or
white-bait?(20*)
    It would be waste of time to purpose these fallacies farther;
we will seek for a true definition.
    Much store has been set for centuries upon the use of our
English classical education. It were to be wished that our
well-educated merchants recalled to mind always this much of
their latin schooling, -- that the nominative of valorem (a word
already sufficiently familiar to them) is valor; a word which,
therefore, ought to be familiar to them. Valor, from valere, to
be well or strong; -- strong, life (if a man), or valiant;
strong, for life (if a thing), or valuable. To be "valuable,"
therefore, is to "avail towards life." A truly valuable or
availing thing is that which leads to life with its whole
strength. In proportion as it does not lead to life, or as its
strength is broken, it is less valuable; in proportion as it
leads away from life, it is unvaluable or malignant.
    The value of a thing, therefore, is independent of opinion,
and of quantity. Think what you will of it, gain how much you may
of it, the value of the thing itself is neither greater nor less.
For ever it avails, or avails not; no estimate can raise, no
disdain repress, the power which it holds from the Maker of
things and of men.
    The real science of political economy, which has yet to be
distinguished from the bastard science, as medicine from
witchcraft, and astronomy from astrology, is that which teaches
nations to desire and labour for the things that lead to life:
and which teaches them to scorn and destroy the things that lead
to destruction. And if, in a state of infancy, they supposed
indifferent things, such as excrescences of shell-fish, and
pieces of blue and red stone, to be valuable, and spent large
measures of the labour which ought to be employed for the
extension and ennobling of life, in diving or digging for them,
and cutting them into various shapes,or if, in the same state of
infancy, they imagine precious and beneficent things, such as
air, light, and cleanliness, to be valueless,-or if, finally,
they imagine the conditions of their own existence, by which
alone they can truly possess or use anything, such, for instance,
as peace, trust, and love, to be prudently exchangeable, when the
markets offer, for gold, iron, or excresrences of shells -- the
great and only science of Political Economy teaches them, in all
these cases, what is vanity, and what substance; and how the
service of Death, the lord of Waste, and of eternal emptiness,
differs from the service of Wisdom, the lady of Saving, and of
eternal fulness; she who has said, "I will cause those that love
me to inherit SUBSTANCE; and I will FILL their treasures."
    The "Lady of Saving," in a profounder sense than that of the
savings bank, though that is a good one: Madonna della Salute, --
Lady of Health, -- which, though commonly spoken of as if
separate from wealth, is indeed a part of wealth. This word,
"wealth," it will be remembered, is the next we have to define.
    "To be wealthy" says Mr Mill, "is to have a large stock of
useful articles." I accept this definition. Only let us perfectly
understand it. My opponents often lament my not giving them
enough logic: I fear I must at present use a little more than
they will like: but this business of Political Economy is no
light one, and we must allow no loose terms in it.
    We have, therefore, to ascertain in the above definition,
first, what is the meaning of "having," or the nature of
Possession. Then what is the meaning of "useful," or the nature
of Utility.
    And first of possession. At the crossing of the transepts of
Milan Cathedral has lain, for three hundred years, the embalmed
body of St. Carlo Borromeo. It holds a golden crosier, and has a
cross of emeralds on its breast. Admitting the crosier and
emeralds to be useful articles, is the body to be considered as
"having" them? Do they, in the politico-economical sense of
property, belong to it? If not, and if we may, therefore,
conclude generally that a dead body cannot possess property, what
degree and period of animation in the body will render possession
possible?
    As thus: lately in a wreck of a Californian ship, one of the
passengers fastened a belt about him with two hundred pounds of
gold in it, with which he was found afterwards at the bottom.
Now, as he was sinking -- had he the gold? or had the gold
him?(21*)
    And if, instead of sinking him in the sea by its weight, the
gold had struck him on the forehead, and thereby caused incurable
disease -- suppose palsy or insanity, -- would the gold in that
case have been more a "possession" than in the first? Without
pressing the inquiry up through instances of gradually increasing
vital power over the gold (which I will, however, give, if they
are asked for), I presume the reader will see that possession, or
"having," is not an absolute, but a gradated, power; and consists
not only in the quantity or nature of the thing possessed, but
also (and in a greater degree) in its suitableness to the person
possessing it and in his vital power to use it.
    And our definition of Wealth, expanded, becomes: "The
possession of useful articles, which we can use." This is a very
serious change. For wealth, instead of depending merely on a
"have," is thus seen to depend on a "can." Gladiator's death, on
a "habet"; but soldier's victory, and State's salvation, on a
"quo plurimum posset." (liv. VII. 6.) And what we reasoned of
only as accumulation of material, is seen to demand also
accumulation of capacity.
    So much for our verb. Next for our adjective. What is the
meaning of "useful"?
    The inquiry is closely connected with the last. For what is
capable of use in the hands of some persons, is capable, in the
hands of others, of the opposite of use, called commonly
"from-use," or "ab-use." And it depends on the person, much more
than on the article, whether its usefulness or ab-usefulness will
be the quality developed in it. Thus, wine, which the Greeks, in
their Bacchus, made rightly the type of all passion, and which,
when used, "cheereth god and man" (that is to say, strengthens
both the divine life, or reasoning power, and the earthy, or
carnal power, of man); yet, when abused, becomes "Dionysos,"
hurtful especially to the divine part of man, or reason. And
again, the body itself, being equally liable to use and to abuse,
and, when rightly disciplined, serviceable to the State, both for
war and labour, -- but when not disciplined, or abused, valueless
to the State, and capable only of continuing the private or
single existence of the individual (and that but feebly) -- the
Greeks called such a body an "idiotic" or "private" body, from
their word signifying a person employed in no way directly useful
to the State; whence finally, our "idiot," meaning a person
entirely occupied with his own concerns.
    Hence, it follows that if a thing is to be useful, it must be
not only of an availing nature, but in availing hands. Or, in
accurate terms, usefulness is value in the hands of the valiant;
so that this science of wealth being, as we have just seen, when
regarded as the science of Accumulation, accumulative of capacity
as well as of material, -- when regarded as the Science of
Distribution, is distribution not absolute, but discriminate; not
of every thing to every man, but of the right thing to the right
man. A difficult science, dependent on more than arithmetic.
    Wealth, therefore, is "THE POSSESSION OF THE VALUABLE BY THE
VALIANT"; and in considering it as a power existing in a nation,
the two elements, the value of the thing, and the valour of its
possessor, must be estimated together. Whence it appears that
many of the persons commonly considered wealthy, are in reality
no more wealthy than the locks of their own strong boxes are,
they being inherently and eternally incapable of wealth; and
operating for the nation, in an economical point of view, either
as pools of dead water, and eddies in a stream (which, so long as
the stream flows, are useless, or serve only to drown people, but
may become of importance in a state of stagnation should the
stream dry); or else, as dams in a river, of which the ultimate
service depends not on the dam, but the miller; or else, as mere
accidental stays and impediments, acting not as wealth, but (for
we ought to have a correspondent term) as "illth," causing
various devastation and trouble around them in all directions; or
lastly, act not at all, but are merely animated conditions of
delay, (no use being possible of anything they have until they
are dead,) in which last condition they are nevertheless often
useful as delays, and "impedimenta," if a nation is apt to move
too fast.
    This being so, the difficulty of the true science of
Political Economy lies not merely in the need of developing manly
character to deal with material value, but in the fact, that
while the manly character and material value only form wealth by
their conjunction, they have nevertheless a mutually destructive
operation on each other. For the manly character is apt to
ignore, or even cast away, the material value: -- whence that of
Pope: --
    "Sure, of qualities demanding praise,
    More go to ruin fortunes, than to raise."

And on the other hand, the material value is apt to undermine the
manly character; so that it must be our work, in the issue, to
examine what evidence there is of the effect of wealth on the
minds of its possessors; also, what kind of person it is who
usually sets himself to obtain wealth, and succeeds in doing so;
and whether the world owes more gratitude to rich or to poor men,
either for their moral influence upon it, or for chief goods,
discoveries, and practical advancements. I may, however,
anticipate future conclusions, so far as to state that in a
community regulated only by laws of demand and supply, but
protected from open violence, the persons who become rich are,
generally speaking, industrious, resolute, proud, covetous,
prompt, methodical, sensible, unimaginative, insensitive, and
ignorant. The persons who remain poor are the entirely foolish,
the entirely wise,(22*) the idle, the reckless, the humble, the
thoughtful, the dull, the imaginative, the sensitive, the
well-informed, the improvident, the irregularly and impulsively
wicked, the clumsy knave, the open thief, and the entirely
merciful, just, and godly person.
    Thus far, then, of wealth. Next, we have to ascertain the
nature of PRICE; that is to say, of exchange value, and its
expression by currencies.
    Note first, of exchange, there can be no profit in it. It is
only in labour there can be profit -- that is to say, a "making
in advance," or "making in favour of" (from proficio). In
exchange, there is only advantage, i.e., a bringing of vantage or
power to the exchanging persons. Thus, one man, by sowing and
reaping, turns one measure of corn into two measures. That is
Profit. Another, by digging and forging, turns one spade into two
spades. That is Profit. But the man who has two measures of corn
wants sometimes to dig; and the man who has two spades wants
sometimes to eat:They exchange the gained grain for the gained
tool; and both are the better for the exchange; but though there
is much advantage in the transaction, there is no profit. Nothing
is constructed or produced. Only that which had been before
constructed is given to the person by whom it can be used. If
labour is necessary to effect the exchange, that labour is in
reality involved in the production, and, like all other labour,
bears profit. Whatever number of men are concerned in the
manufacture, or in the conveyance, have share in the profit; but
neither the manufacture nor the conveyance are the exchange, and
in the exchange itself there is no profit.
    There may, however, be acquisition, which is a very different
thing. If, in the exchange, one man is able to give what cost him
little labour for what has cost the other much, he "acquires" a
certain quantity of the produce of the other's labour. And
precisely what he acquires, the other loses. In mercantile
language, the person who thus acquires is commonly said to have
"made a profit"; and I believe that many of our merchants are
seriously under the impression that it is possible for everybody,
somehow, to make a profit in this manner. Whereas, by the
unfortunate constitution of the world we live in, the laws both
of matter and motion have quite rigorously forbidden universal
acquisition of this kind. Profit, or material gain, is attainable
only by construction or by discovery; not by exchange. Whenever
material gain follows exchange, for every plus there is a
precisely equal minus.
    Unhappily for the progress of the science of Political
Economy, the plus quantities, or, -- if I may be allowed to coin
an awkward plural -- the pluses, make a very positive and
venerable appearance in the world, so that every one is eager to
learn the science which produces results so magnificent; whereas
the minuses have, on the other hand, a tendency to retire into
back streets, and other places of shade, -- or even to get
themselves wholly and finally put out of sight in graves: which
renders the algebra of this science peculiar, and difficultly
legible; a large number of its negative signs being written by
the account-keeper in a kind of red ink, which starvation thins,
and makes strangely pale, or even quite invisible ink, for the
present.
    The Science of Exchange, or, as I hear it has been proposed
to call it, of "Catallactics," considered as one of gain, is,
therefore, simply nugatory; but considered as one of acquisition,
it is a very curious science, differing in its data and basis
from every other science known. Thus: -- if I can exchange a
needle with a savage for a diamond, my power of doing so depends
either on the savage's ignorance of social arrangements in
Europe, or on his want of power to take advantage of them, by
selling the diamond to any one else for more needles. If,
farther, I make the bargain as completely advantageous to myself
as possible, by giving to the savage a needle with no eye in it
(reaching, thus a sufficiently satisfactory type of the perfect
operation of catallactic science), the advantage to me in the
entire transaction depends wholly upon the ignorance,
powerlessness, or heedlessness of the person dealt with. Do away
with these, and catallactic advantage becomes impossible. So far,
therefore, as the science of exchange relates to the advantage of
one of the exchanging persons only, it is founded on the
ignorance or incapacity of the opposite person. Where these
vanish, it also vanishes. It is therefore a science founded on
nescience, and an art founded on artlessness. But all other
sciences and arts, except this, have for their object the doing
away with their opposite nescience and artlessness. This science,
alone of sciences, must, by all available means, promulgate and
prolong its opposite nescience; otherwise the science itself is
impossible. It is, therefore, peculiarly and alone the science of
darkness; probably a bastard science -- not by any means a divina
scientia, but one begotten of another father, that father who,
advising his children to turn stones into bread, is himself
employed in turning bread into stones, and who, if you ask a fish
of him (fish not being producible on his estate), can but give
you a serpent.
    The general law, then, respecting just or economical
exchange, is simply this: -- There must be advantage on both
sides (or if only advantage on one, at least no disadvantage on
the other) to the persons exchanging; and just payment for his
time, intelligence, and labour, to any intermediate person
effecting the transaction (commonly called a merchant); and
whatever advantage there is on either side, and whatever pay is
given to the intermediate person, should be thoroughly known to
all concerned. All attempt at concealment implies some practice
of the opposite, or undivine science, founded on nescience.
Whence another saying of the Jew merchant's -- "As a nail between
the stone joints, so doth sin stick fast between buying and
selling." Which peculiar riveting of stone and timber, in men's
dealings with each other, is again set forth in the house which
was to be destroyed -- timber and stones together -- when
Zechariah's roll (more probably "curved sword") flew over it:
"the curse that goeth forth over all the earth upon every one
that stealeth and holdeth himself guiltless," instantly followed
by the vision of the Great Measure; -- the measure "of the
injustice of them in all the earth" (auti i adikia auton en pase
te ge), with the weight of lead for its lid, and the woman, the
spirit of wickedness, within it; -- that is to say, Wickedness
hidden by Dulness, and formalized, outwardly, into ponderously
established cruelty. " It shall be set upon its own base in the
land of Babel." (23*)
    I have hitherto carefully restricted myself, in speaking of
exchange, to the use of the term "advantage"; but that term
includes two ideas; the advantage, namely, of getting what we
need, and that of getting what we wish for. Three-fourths of the
demands existing in the world are romantic; founded on visions,
idealisms, hopes, and affections; and the regulation of the purse
is, in its essence, regulation of the imagination and the heart.
Hence, the right discussion of the nature of price is a very high
metaphysical and psychical problem; sometimes to be solved only
in a passionate manner, as by David in his counting the price of
the water of the well by the gate of Bethlehem; but its first
conditions are the following: -- The price of anything is the
quantity of labour given by the person desiring it, in order to
obtain possession of it. This price depends on four variable
quantities. A. The quantity of wish the purchaser has for the
thing; opposed to a, the quantity of wish the seller has to keep
it. B. The quantity of labour the purchaser can afford, to obtain
the thing opposed to B, the quantity of labour the seller can
afford, to keep it. These quantities are operative only in
excess; i.e. the quantity of wish (A) means the quantity of wish
for this thing, above wish for other things; and the quantity of
work (B) means the quantity which can be spared to get this thing
from the quantity needed to get other things.
    Phenomena of price, therefore, are intensely complex,
curious, and interesting -- too complex, however, to be examined
yet; every one of them, when traced far enough, showing itself at
last as a part of the bargain of the Poor of the Flock (or "flock
of slaughter"), "If ye think good, give ME my price, and if not,
forbear" Zech. xi. 12; but as the price of everything is to be
calculated finally in labour, it is necessary to define the
nature of that standard.
    Labour is the contest of the life of man with an opposite; --
the term "life" including his intellect, soul, and physical
power, contending with question, difficulty, trial, or material
force.
    Labour is of a higher or lower order, as it includes more or
fewer of the elements of life: and labour of good quality, in any
kind, includes always as much intellect and feeling as will fully
and harmoniously regulate the physical force.
    In speaking of the value and price of labour, it is necessary
always to understand labour of a given rank and quality, as we
should speak of gold or silver of a given standard. Bad (that is,
heartless, inexperienced, or senseless) labour cannot be valued;
it is like gold of uncertain alloy, or flawed iron.(24*)
    The quality and kind of labour being given, its value, like
that of all other valuable things, is invariable. But the
quantity of it which must be given for other things is variable:
and in estimating this variation, the price of other things must
always be counted by the quantity of labour; not the price of
labour by the quantity of other things.
    Thus, if we want to plant an apple sapling in rocky ground,
it may take two hours' work; in soft ground, perhaps only half an
hour. Grant the soil equally good for the tree in each case. Then
the value of the sapling planted by two hours' work is nowise
greater than that of the sapling planted in half an hour. One
will bear no more fruit than the other. Also, one half-hour of
work is as valuable as another half-hour; nevertheless the one
sapling has cost four such pieces of work, the other only one.
Now the proper statement of this fact is, not that the labour on
the hard ground is cheaper than on the soft; but that the tree is
dearer. The exchange value may, or may not, afterwards depend on
this fact. If other people have plenty of soft ground to plant
in, they will take no cognizance of our two hours' labour, in the
price they will offer for the plant on the rock. And if, through
want of sufficient botanical science, we have planted an upas
tree instead of an apple, the exchange-value will be a negative
quantity; still less proportionate to the labour expended.
    What is commonly called cheapness of labour, signifies,
therefore, in reality, that many obstacles have to be overcome by
it; so that much labour is required to produce a small result.
But this should never be spoken of as cheapness of labour, but as
dearness of the object wrought for. It would be just as rational
to say that walking was cheap, because we had ten miles to walk
home to our dinner, as that labour was cheap, because we had to
work ten hours to earn it.
    The last word which we have to define is "Production."
    I have hitherto spoken of all labour as profitable; because
it is impossible to consider under one head the quality or value
of labour, and its aim. But labour of the best quality may be
various in aim. It may be either constructive ("gathering" from
con and struo), as agriculture; nugatory, as jewel-cutting; or
destructive ("scattering," from de and struo), as war. It is not,
however, always easy to prove labour, apparently nugatory, to be
actually so;(25*) generally, the formula holds good: "he that
gathereth not, scattereth"; thus, the jeweller's art is probably
very harmful in its ministering to a clumsy and inelegant pride.
So that, finally, I believe nearly all labour may be shortly
divided into positive and negative labour: positive, that which
produces life; negative, that which produces death; the most
directly negative labour being murder, and the most directly
positive, the bearing and rearing of children; so that in the
precise degree in which murder is hateful, on the negative side
of idleness, in the exact degree child-rearing is admirable, on
the positive side of idleness. For which reason, and because of
the honour that there is in rearing children,(26*) while the wife
is said to be as the vine (for cheering), the children are as the
olive branch, for praise: nor for praise only, but for peace
(because large families can only be reared in times of peace):
though since, in their spreading and voyaging in various
directions, they distribute strength, they are, to the home
strength, as arrives in the hand of the giant -- striking here,
and there far away.
    Labour being thus various in its result, the prosperity of
any nation is in exact proportion to the quantity of labour which
it spends in obtaining and employing means of life. Observe, -- I
say, obtaining and employing; that is to say, not merely wisely
producing, but wisely distributing and consuming. Economists
usually speak as if there were no good in consumption
absolute.(27*) So far from this being so, consumption absolute is
the end, crown, and perfection of production; and wise
consumption is a far more difficult art than wise production.
Twenty people can gain money for one who can use it; and the
vital question, for individual and for nation, is, never "how
much do they make?" but "to what purpose do they spend?"
    The reader may, perhaps, have been surprised at the slight
reference I have hitherto made to "capital," and its functions.
It is here the place to define them.
    Capital signifies "head, or source, or root material" -- it
is material by which some derivative or secondary good is
produced. It is only capital proper (caput vivum, not caput
mortuum) when it is thus producing something different from
itself. It is a root, which does not enter into vital function
till it produces something else than a root: namely, fruit. That
fruit will in time again produce roots; and so all living capital
issues in reproduction of capital; but capital which produces
nothing but capital is only root producing root; bulb issuing in
bulb, never in tulip; seed issuing in seed, never in bread. The
Political Economy of Europe has hitherto devoted itself wholly to
the multiplication, or (less even) the aggregation, of bulbs. It
never saw, nor conceived, such a thing as a tulip. Nay, boiled
bulbs they might have been -- glass bulbs -- Prince Rupert's
drops, consummated in powder (well, if it were glass-powder and
not gunpowder), for any end or meaning the economists had in
defining the laws of aggregation. We will try and get a clearer
notion of them.
    The best and simplest general type of capital is a well-made
ploughshare. Now, if that ploughshare did nothing but beget other
ploughshares, in a polypous manner, -- however the great cluster
of polypous plough might glitter in the sun, it would have lost
its function of capital. It becomes true capital only by another
kind of splendour, -- when it is seen "splendescere sulco," to
grow bright in the furrow; rather with diminution of its
substance, than addition, by the noble friction. And the true
home question, to every capitalist and to every nation, is not,
"how many ploughs have you?" but, "where are your furrows?" not
-- "how quickly will this capital reproduce itself?" -- but,
"what will it do during reproduction?" What substance will it
furnish, good for life? what work construct, protective of life?
if none, its own reproduction is useless -- if worse than none,
(for capital may destroy life as well as support it), its own
reproduction is worse than useless; it is merely an advance from
Tisiphone, on mortgage -- not a profit by any means.
    Not a profit, as the ancients truly saw, and showed in the
type of Ixion; -- for capital is the head, or fountain head of
wealth -- the "well-head" of wealth, as the clouds are the
well-heads of rain; but when clouds are without water, and only
beget clouds, they issue in wrath at last, instead of rain, and
in lightning instead of harvest; whence Ixion is said first to
have invited his guests to a banquet, and then made them fall
into a pit, (as also Demas' silver mine,) after which, to show
the rage of riches passing from lust of pleasure to lust of
power, yet power not truly understood, Ixion is said to have
desired Juno, and instead, embracing a cloud (or phantasm), to
have begotten the Centaurs; the power of mere wealth being, in
itself, as the embrace of a shadow, -- comfortless, (so also
"Ephraim feedeth on wind and followth after the east wind;" or
"that which is not" -- Prov. xxiii. 5; and again Dante's Geryon,
the type of avaricious fraud, as he flies, gathers the air up
with retractile claws, -- "l'aer a se raccolse"(28*)) but in its
offspring, a mingling of the brutal with the human nature; human
in sagacity -- using both intellect and arrow; but brutal in its
body and hoof, for consuming, and trampling down. For which sin
Ixion is at last bound upon a wheel -- fiery and toothed, and
rolling perpetually in the air: -- the type of human labour when
selfish and fruitless (kept far into the Middle Ages in their
wheels of fortune); the wheel which has in it no breath or
spirit, but is whirled by chance only; whereas of all true work
the Ezekiel vision is true, that the Spirit of the living
creature is in the wheels, and where the angels go, the wheels go
by them; but move no otherwise.
    This being the real nature of capital, it follows that there
are two kinds of true production, always going on in an active
State: one of seed, and one of food; or production for the
Ground, and for the Mouth; both of which are by covetous persons
thought to be production only for the granary; whereas the
function of the granary is but intermediate and conservative,
fulfilled in distribution; else it ends in nothing but mildew,
and nourishment of rats and worms. And since production for the
Ground is only useful with future hope of harvest, all essential
production is for the Mouth; and is finally measured by the
mouth; hence, as I said above, consumption is the crown of
production; and the wealth of a nation is only to be estimated by
what it consumes.
    The want of any clear sight of this fact is the capital
error, issuing in rich interest and revenue of error among the
political economists. Their minds are continually set on
money-gain, not on mouth-gain; and they fall into every sort of
net and snare, dazzled by the coin-glitter as birds by the
fowler's glass; or rather (for there is not much else like birds
in them) they are like children trying to jump on the heads of
their own shadows; the money-gain being only the shadow of the
true gain, which is humanity.
    The final object of political economy, therefore, is to get
good method of consumption, and great quantity of consumption: in
other words, to use everything, and to use it nobly. whether it
be substance, service, or service perfecting substance. The most
curious error in Mr Mill's entire work, (provided for him
originally by Ricardo,) is his endeavour to distinguish between
direct and indirect service, and consequent assertion that a
demand for commodities is not demand for labour (I. v. 9, et
seq.). He distinguishes between labourers employed to lay out
pleasure grounds, and to manufacture velvet; declaring that it
makes material difference to the labouring classes in which of
these two ways a capitalist spends his money; because the
employment of the gardeners is a demand for labour, but the
purchase of velvet is not.(29*) Error colossal, as well as
strange. It will, indeed, make a difference to the labourer
whether we bid him swing his scythe in the spring winds, or drive
the loom in pestilential air. but, so far as his pocket is
concerned, it makes, to him absolutely no difference whether we
order him to make green velvet, with seed and a scythe, or red
velvet, with silk and scissors. Neither does it anywise concern
him whether, when the velvet is made, we consume it by walking on
it, or wearing it, so long as our consumption of it is wholly
selfish. But if our consumption is to be in anywise unselfish,
not only our mode of consuming the articles we require interests
him, but also the kind of article we require with a view to
consumption. As thus (returning for a moment to Mr Mill's great
hardware theory(30*)): it matters, so far as the labourer's
immediate profit is concerned, not an iron filing whether I
employ him in growing a peach, or forging a bombshell; but my
probable mode of consumption of those articles matters seriously.
Admit that it is to be in both cases "unselfish," and the
difference, to him, is final, whether when his child is ill, I
walk into his cottage and give it the peach, or drop the shell
down his chimney, and blow his roof off.
    The worst of it, for the peasant, is, that the capitalist's
consumption of the peach is apt to be selfish, and of the shell,
distributive;(31*) but, in all cases, this is the broad and
general fact, that on due catallactic commercial principles,
somebody's roof must go off in fulfilment of the bomb's destiny.
You may grow for your neighbour, at your liking, grapes or
grape-shot; he will also, catallactically, grow grapes or
grape-shot for you, and you will each reap what you have sown.
    It is, therefore, the manner and issue of consumption which
are the real tests of production. Production does not consist in
things laboriously made, but in things serviceably consumable;
and the question for the nation is not how much labour it
employs, but how much life it produces. For as consumption is the
end and aim of production, so life is the end and aim of
consumption.
    I left this question to the reader's thought two months ago,
choosing rather that he should work it out for himself than have
it sharply stated to him. But now, the ground being sufficiently
broken (and the details into which the several questions, here
opened, must lead us, being too complex for discussion in the
pages of a periodical, so that I must pursue them elsewhere), I
desire, in closing the series of introductory papers, to leave
this one great fact clearly stated. THERE IS NO WEALTH BUT LIFE.
Life, including all its powers of love, of joy, and of
admiration. That country is the richest which nourishes the
greatest number of noble and happy human beings; that man is
richest who, having perfected the functions of his own life to
the utmost, has also the widest helpful influence, both personal,
and by means of his possessions, over the lives of others.
    A strange political economy; the only one, nevertheless, that
ever was or can be: all political economy founded on
self-interest(32*) being but the fulfilment of that which once
brought schism into the Policy of angels, and ruin into the
Economy of Heaven.
    "The greatest number of human beings noble and happy." But is
the nobleness consistent with the number? Yes, not only
consistent with it, but essential to it. The maximum of life can
only be reached by the maximum of virtue. In this respect the law
of human population differs wholly from that of animal life. The
multiplication of animals is checked only by want of food, and by
the hostility of races; the population of the gnat is restrained
by the hunger of the swallow, and that of the swallow by the
scarcity of gnats. Man, considered as an animal, is indeed
limited by the same laws: hunger, or plague, or war, are the
necessary and only restraints upon his increase, -- effectual
restraints hitherto, -- his principal study having been how most
swiftly to destroy himself, or ravage his dwelling-places, and
his highest skill directed to give range to the famine, seed to
the plague, and sway to the sword. But, considered as other than
an animal, his increase is not limited by these laws. It is
limited only by the limits of his courage and his love. Both of
these have their bounds; and ought to have; his race has its
bounds also; but these have not yet been reached, nor will be
reached for ages.
    In all the ranges of human thought I know none so melancholy
as the speculations of political economists on the population
question. It is proposed to better the condition of the labourer
by giving him higher wages. "Nay," says the economist, -- "if you
raise his wages, he will either people down to the same point of
misery at which you found him, or drink your wages away." He
will. I know it. Who gave him this will? Suppose it were your own
son of whom you spoke, declaring to me that you dared not take
him into your firm, nor even give him his just labourer's wages,
because if you did he would die of drunkenness, and leave half a
score of children to the parish. "Who gave your son these
dispositions?" -- I should enquire. Has he them by inheritance or
by education? By one or other they must come; and as in him, so
also in the poor. Either these poor are of a race essentially
different from ours, and unredeemable (which, however, often
implied, I have heard none yet openly say), or else by such care
as we have ourselves received, we may make them continent and
sober as ourselves-wise and dispassionate as we are models
arduous of imitation. "But," it is answered, "they cannot receive
education." Why not? That is precisely the point at issue.
Charitable persons suppose the worst fault of the rich is to
refuse the people meat; and the people cry for their meat, kept
back by fraud, to the Lord of Multitudes.(33*) Alas! it is not
meat of which the refusal is cruelest, or to which the claim is
validest. The life is more than the meat. The rich not only
refuse food to the poor; they refuse wisdom; they refuse virtue;
they refuse salvation. Ye sheep without shepherd, it is not the
pasture that has been shut from you, but the Presence. Meat!
perhaps your right to that may be pleadable; but other rights
have to be pleaded first. Claim your crumbs from the table, if
you will; but claim them as children, not as dogs; claim your
right to be fed, but claim more loudly your right to be holy,
perfect, and pure.
    Strange words to be used of working people: "What! holy;
without any long robes nor anointing oils; these rough-jacketed,
rough-worded persons; set to nameless and dishonoured service?
Perfect! -- these, with dim eyes and cramped limbs, and slowly
wakening minds? Pure -- these, with sensual desire and grovelling
thought; foul of body, and coarse of soul?" It may be so;
nevertheless, such as they are, they are the holiest, perfectest,
purest persons the earth can at present show. They may be what
you have said; but if so, they yet are holier than we, who have
left them thus.
    But what can be done for them? Who can clothe -- who teach --
who restrain their multitudes? What end can there he for them at
last, but to consume one another?
    I hope for another end, though not, indeed, from any of the
three remedies for over-population commonly suggested by
economists.
    These three are, in brief -- Colonization; Bringing in of
waste lands; or Discouragement of Marriage.
    The first and second of these expedients merely evade or
delay the question. It will, indeed, be long before the world has
been all colonized, and its deserts all brought under
cultivation. But the radical question is not how much habitable
land is in the world, but how many human beings ought to be
maintained on a given space of habitable land.
    Observe, I say, ought to be, not how many can be. Ricardo,
with his usual inaccuracy, defines what he calls the "natural
rate of wages" as "that which will maintain the labourer."
Maintain him! yes; but how? -- the question was instantly thus
asked of me by a working girl, to whom I read the passage. I will
amplify her question for her. "Maintain him, how?" As, first, to
what length of life? Out of a given number of fed persons how
many are to be old -- how many young; that is to say, will you
arrange their maintenance so as to kill them early -- say at
thirty or thirty-five on the average, including deaths of weakly
or ill-fed children? -- or so as to enable them to live out a
natural life? You will feed a greater number, in the first
case,(34*) by rapidity of succession; probably a happier number
in the second: which does Mr Ricardo mean to be their natural
state, and to which state belongs the natural rate of wages?
    Again: A piece of land which will only support ten idle,
ignorant, and improvident persons, will support thirty or forty
intelligent and industrious ones. Which of these is their natural
state, and to which of them belongs the natural rate of wages?
    Again: If a piece of land support forty persons in
industrious ignorance; and if, tired of this ignorance, they set
apart ten of their number to study the properties of cones, and
the sizes of stars; the labour of these ten, being withdrawn from
the ground, must either tend to the increase of food in some
transitional manner, or the persons set apart for sidereal and
conic purposes must starve, or some one else starve instead of
them. What is, therefore, the natural rate of wages of the
scientific persons, and how does this rate relate to, or measure,
their reverted or transitional productiveness?
    Again: If the ground maintains, at first, forty labourers in
a peaceable and pious state of mind, but they become in a few
years so quarrelsome and impious that they have to set apart
five, to meditate upon and settle their disputes; -- ten, armed
to the teeth with costly instruments, to enforce the decisions;
and five to remind everybody in an eloquent manner of the
existence of a God; what will be the result upon the general
power of production, and what is the "natural rate of wages" of
the meditative, muscular, and oracular labourers?
    Leaving these questions to be discussed, or waived, at their
pleasure, by Mr Ricardo's followers, I proceed to state the main
facts bearing on that probable future of the labouring classes
which has been partially glanced at by Mr Mill. That chapter and
the preceding one differ from the common writing of political
economists in admitting some value in the aspect of nature, and
expressing regret at the probability of the destruction of
natural scenery. But we may spare our anxieties, on this head.
Men can neither drink steam, nor eat stone. The maximum of
population on a given space of land implies also the relative
maximum of edible vegetable, whether for men or cattle; it
implies a maximum of pure air; and of pure water. Therefore: a
maximum of wood, to transmute the air, and of sloping ground,
protected by herbage from the extreme heat of the sun, to feed
the streams. All England may, if it so chooses, become one
manufacturing town; and Englishmen, sacrificing themselves to the
good of general humanity, may live diminished lives in the midst
of noise, of darkness, and of deadly exhalation. But the world
cannot become a factory, nor a mine. No amount of ingenuity will
ever make iron digestible by the million, nor substitute hydrogen
for wine. Neither the avarice nor the rage of men will ever feed
them, and however the apple of Sodom and the grape of Gomorrah
may spread their table for a time with dainties of ashes, and
nectar of asps, -- so long as men live by bread, the far away
valleys must laugh as they are covered with the gold of God, and
the shouts of His happy multitudes ring round the wine-press and
the well.
    Nor need our more sentimental economists fear the too wide
spread of the formalities of a mechanical agriculture. The
presence of a wise population implies the search for felicity as
well as for food; nor can any population reach its maximum but
through that wisdom which "rejoices" in the habitable parts of
the earth. The desert has its appointed place and work; the
eternal engine, whose beam is the earth's axle, whose beat is its
year, and whose breath is its ocean, will still divide
imperiously to their desert kingdoms, bound with unfurrowable
rock, and swept by unarrested sand, their powers of frost and
fire: but the zones and lands between, habitable, will be
loveliest in habitation. The desire of the heart is also the
light of the eyes. No scene is continually and untiringly loved,
but one rich by joyful human labour; smooth in field; fair in
garden; full in orchard; trim, sweet, and frequent in homestead;
ringing with voices of vivid existence. No air is sweet that is
silent; it is only sweet when full of low currents of under
sound-triplets of birds, and murmur and chirp of insects, and
deep-toned words of men, and wayward trebles of childhood. As the
art of life is learned, it will be found at last that all lovely
things are also necessary: -- the wild flower by the wayside, as
well as the tended corn; and the wild birds and creatures of the
by every wondrous word and unknowable work of God. Happy, in that
he knew them not, nor did his fathers know; and that round about
him reaches yet into the infinite, the amazement of his
existence.
    Note, finally, that all effectual advancement towards this
true felicity of the human race must be by individual, not public
effort. Certain general measures may aid, certain revised laws
guide, such advancement; but the measure and law which have first
to be determined are those of each man's home. We continually
hear it recommended by sagacious people to complaining neighbours
(usually less well placed in the world than themselves), that
they should "remain content in the station in which Providence
has placed them." There are perhaps some circumstances of life in
which Providence has no intention that people should be content.
Nevertheless, the maxim is on the whole a good one; but it is
peculiarly for home use. That your neighbour should, or should
not, remain content with his position, is not your business; but
it is very much your business to remain content with your own.
What is chiefly needed in England at the present day is to show
the quantity of pleasure that may be obtained by a consistent,
well-administered competence, modest, confessed, and laborious.
We need examples of people who, leaving Heaven to decide whether
they are to rise in the world, decide for them selves that they
will be happy in it, and have resolved to seek-not greater
wealth, but simpler pleasure; not higher fortune, but deeper
felicity; making the first of possessions, self-possession; and
honouring themselves in the harmless pride and calm pursuits of
piece.
    Of which lowly peace it is written that "justice" and peace
have kissed each other;" and that the fruit of justice is " sown
in peace of them that make peace;" not "peace-makers" in the
common understanding -- reconcilers of quarrels; (though that
function also follows on the greater one;) but peace-Creators;
Givers of Calm. Which you cannot give, unless you first gain; nor
is this gain one which will follow assuredly on any course of
business, commonly so called. No form of gain is less probable,
business being (as is shown in the language of all nations --
polein from pelo, prasis from perao, venire, vendre, and venal,
from venio, &c.) essentially restless -- and probably
contentious; -- having a raven-like mind to the motion to and
fro, as to the carrion food; whereas the olive-feeding and
bearing birds look for rest for their feet: thus it is said of
Wisdom that she "hath builded her house, and hewn out her seven
pillars;" and even when, though apt to wait long at the
door-posts, she has to leave her house and go abroad, her paths
are peace also.
    For us, at all events, her work must begin at the entry of
the doors: all true economy is "Law of the house." Strive to make
that law strict, simple, generous: waste nothing, and grudge
nothing. Care in nowise to make more of money, but care to make
much of it; remembering always the great, palpable, inevitable
fact -- the rule and root of all economy -- that what one person
has, another cannot have; and that every atom of substance, of
whatever kind, used or consumed, is so much human life spent;
which, if it issue in the saving present life, or gaining more,
is well spent, but if not, is either so much life prevented, or
so much slain. In all buying, consider, first, what condition of
existence you cause in the producers of what you buy; secondly,
whether the sum you have paid is just to the producer, and in due
proportion, lodged in his hands;(35*) thirdly, to how much clear
use, for food, knowledge, or joy, this that you have bought can
be put; and fourthly, to whom and in what way it can be most
speedily and serviceably distributed: in all dealings whatsoever
insisting on entire openness and stern fulfilment; and in all
doings, on perfection and loveliness of accomplishment;
especially on fineness and purity of all marketable commodity:
watching at the same time for all ways of gaining, or teaching,
powers of simple pleasure, and of showing oson en asphodelps geg
oneiar -- the sum of enjoyment depending not on the quantity of
things tasted, but on the vivacity and patience of taste.
    And if, on due and honest thought over these things, it seems
that the kind of existence to which men are now summoned by every
plea of pity and claim of right, may, for some time at least, not
be a luxurious one; -- consider whether, even supposing it
guiltless, luxury would be desired by any of us, if we saw
clearly at our sides the suffering which accompanies it in the
world. Luxury is indeed possible in the future -- innocent and
exquisite; luxury for all, and by the help of all; but luxury at
present can only be enjoyed by the ignorant; the cruelest man
living could not sit at his feast, unless he sat blindfold. Raise
the veil boldly; face the light; and if, as yet, the light of the
eye can only be through tears, and the light of the body through
sackcloth, go thou forth weeping, bearing precious seed, until
the time come, and the kingdom, when Christ's gift of bread, and
bequest of peace, shall be "Unto this last as unto thee"; and
when, for earth's severed multitudes of the wicked and the weary,
there shall be holier reconciliation than that of the narrow
home, and calm economy, where the Wicked cease -- not from
trouble, but from troubling -- and the Weary are at rest.


NOTES:

1. The difference between the two modes of treatment, and between
their effective material results, may be seen very accurately by
a comparison of the relations of Esther and Charlie in Bleak
House, with those of Miss Brass and the Marchioness in Master
Humphrey's Clock.
    The essential value and truth of Dickens's writings have been
unwisely lost sight of by many thoughtful persons, merely because
he presents his truth with some colour of caricature. Unwisely,
because Dickens's caricature, though often gross, is never
mistaken. Allowing for his manner of telling them, the things he
tells us are always true. I wish that he could think it right to
limit his brilliant exaggeration to works written only for public
amusement; and when he takes up a subject of high national
importance, such as that which he handled in Hard Times, that he
would use severer and more accurate analysis. The usefulness of
that work (to my mind, in several respects, the greatest he has
written) is with many persons seriously diminished because Mr
Bounderby is a dramatic monster, instead of a characteristic
example of a worldly master; and Stephen Blackpool a dramatic
perfection, instead of a characteristic example of an honest
workman. But let us not lose the use of Dickens's wit and
insight, because he chooses to speak in a circle of stage fire.
He is entirely right in his main drift and purpose in every book
he has written; and all of them, but especially Hard Times,
should be studied with close and earnest care by persons
interested in social questions. They will find much that is
partial, and, because partial, apparently unjust; but if they
examine all the evidence on the other side, which Dickens seems
to overlook, it will appear, after all their trouble, that his
view was the finally right one, grossly and sharply told.

2. I have been naturally asked several times, with respect to the
sentence in the first of these papers, "the bad workmen
unemployed," "But what are you to do with your bad unemployed
workmen?" Well, it seems to me the question might have occurred
to you before. Your housemaid's place is vacant -- you give
twenty pounds a year-two girls come for it, one neatly dressed,
the other dirtily; one with good recommendations, the other with
none. You do not, under these circumstances, usually ask the
dirty one if she will come for fifteen pounds, or twelve; and, on
her consenting, take her instead of the well-recommended one.
Still less do you try to beat both down by making them bid
against each other, till you can hire both, one at twelve pounds
a year, and the other at eight. You simply take the one fittest
for the place, and send away the other, not perhaps concerning
yourself quite as much as you should with the question which you
now impatiently put to me, "What is to become of her?" For all
that I advise you to do, is to deal with workmen as with
servants; and verily the question is of weight: "Your bad
workman, idler, and rogue -- what are you to do with him?"
    We will consider of this presently: remember that the
administration of a complete system of national commerce and
industry cannot be explained in full detail within the space of
twelve pages. Meantime, consider whether, there being confessedly
some difficulty in dealing with rogues and idlers, it may not be
advisable to produce as few of them as possible. If you examine
into the history of rogues, you will find they are as truly
manufactured articles as anything else, and it is just because
our present system of political economy gives so large a stimulus
to that manufacture that you may know it to be a false one. We
had better seek for a system which will develop honest men, than
for one which will deal cunningly with vagabonds. Let us reform
our schools, and we shall find little reform needed in our
prisons. 

3. The disputes which exist respecting the real nature of money
arise more from the disputants examining its functions on
different sides, than from any real dissent in their opinions.
All money, properly so called, is an acknowledgment of debt; but
as such, it may either be considered to represent the labour and
property of the creditor, or the idleness and penury of the
debtor. The intricacy of the question has been much increased by
the (hitherto necessary) use of marketable commodities, such as
gold, silver, salt, shells, &c., to give intrinsic value or
security to currency; but the final and best definition of money
is that it is a documentary promise ratified and guaranteed by
the nation to give or find a certain quantity of labour on
demand. A man's labour for a day is a better standard of value
than a measure of any produce, because no produce ever maintains
a consistent rate of productibility. 

4. More accurately, Sun of Justness; but, instead of the harsh
word "Justness," the old English "Righteousness" being commonly
employed, has, by getting confused with "godliness," or
attracting about it various vague and broken meanings. prevented
most persons from receiving the force of the passages in which it
occurs. The word "righteousness" properly refers to the justice
of rule, or right, as distinguished from "equity," which refers
to the justice of balance. More broadly, Righteousness is King's
justice; and Equity, Judge's justice; the King guiding or ruling
all, the Judge dividing or discerning between opposites
(therefore the double question, "Man, who made me a ruler --
dikastes -- or a dividermeristes -- over you?") Thus, with
respect to the Justice of Choice (selection, the feebler and
passive justice), we have from lego, -- lex, legal, loi, and
loyal; and with respect to the Justice of Rule (direction, the
stronger and active justice), we have from rego, -- rex, regal,
roi, and royal.

5. In another place written with the same meaning, "Just, and
having salvation."

6. "Length of days in her right hand; in her left, riches and
honour."

7. I hear that several of our lawyers have been greatly amused by
the statement in the first of these papers that a lawyer's
function was to do justice. I did not intend it for a jest;
nevertheless it will be seen that in the above passage neither
the determination nor doing of justice are contemplated as
functions wholly peculiar to the lawyer. Possibly, the more our
standing armies, whether of soldiers, pastors, or legislators
(the generic term "pastor" including all teachers, and the
generic term "lawyer" including makers as well as interpreters of
law), can be superseded by the force of national heroism, wisdom,
and honesty, the better it may be for the nation. 

8. It being the privilege of the fishes, as it is of rats and
wolves, to live by the laws of demand and supply; but the
distinction of humanity, to live by those of right. 

9. It might appear at first that the market price of labour
expressed such an exchange: but this is a fallacy, for the market
price is the momentary price of the kind of labour required, but
the just price is its equivalent of the productive labour of
mankind. This difference will be analyzed in its place. It must
be noted also that I speak here only of the exchangeable value of
labour, not of that of commodities. The exchangeable value of a
commodity is that of the labour required to produce it,
multiplied into the force of the demand for it. If the value of
the labour = x and the force of demand = y, the exchangeable
value of the commodity is xy, in which if either x = 0, or y = 0,
xy = 0.

10. Under the term "skill" I mean to include the united force of
experience, intellect, and passion in their operation on manual
labour: and under the term "passion," to include the entire range
and agency of the moral feelings; from the simple patience and
gentleness of mind which will give continuity and fineness to the
touch, or enable one person to work without fatigue, and with
good effect, twice as long as another, up to the qualities of
character which renders science possible -- (the retardation of
science by envy is one of the most tremendous losses in the
economy of the present century) -- and to the incommunicable
emotion and imagination which are the first and mightiest sources
of all value in art.
    It is highly singular that political economists should not
yet have perceived, if not the moral, at least the passionate
element, to be an inextricable quantity in every calculation. I
cannot conceive, for instance, how it was possible that Mr Mill
should have followed the true clue so far as to write, -- "No
limit can be set to the importance -- even in a purely productive
and material point of view -- of mere thought," without seeing
that it was logically necessary to add also, "and of mere
feeling." And this the more, because in his first definition of
labour he includes in the idea of it "all feelings of a
disagreeable kind connected with the employment of one's thoughts
in a particular occupation." True; but why not also, "feelings of
an agreeable kind?" It can hardly be supposed that the feelings
which retard labour are more essentially a part of the labour
than those which accelerate it. The first are paid for as pain,
the second as power. The workman is merely indemified for the
first; but the second both produce a part of the exchangeable
value of the work, and materially increase its actual quantity.
    "Fritz is with us. He is worth fifty thousand men." Truly, a
large addition to the material force; -- consisting, however, be
it observed, not more in operations carried on in Fritz's head,
than in operations carried on in his armies' heart. "No limit can
be set to the importance of mere thought." Perhaps not! Nay,
suppose some day it should turn out that "mere" thought was in
itself a recommendable object of production, and that all
Material production was only a step towards this more precious
Immaterial one?

11. I am sorry to lose time by answering, however curtly, the
equivocations of the writers who sought to obscure the instances
given of regulated labour in the first of these papers, by
confusing kinds, ranks, and quantities of labour with its
qualities. I never said that a colonel should have the same pay
as a private, nor a bishop the same pay as a curate. Neither did
I say that more work ought to be paid as less work (so that the
curate of a parish of two thousand souls should have no more than
the curate of a parish of five hundred). But I said that, so far
as you employ it at all, bad work should be paid no less than
good work; as a bad clergyman yet takes his tithes, a bad
physician takes bis fee, and a bad lawyer his costs. And this, as
will be farther shown in the conclusion, I said, and say, partly
because the best work never was, nor ever will be, done for money
at all; but chiefly because, the moment people know they have to
pay the bad and good alike, they will try to discern the one from
the other, and not use the bad. A sagacious writer in the
Scotsman asks me if I should like any common scribbler to be paid
by Messrs Smith, Elder and Co. as their good authors are. I
should, if they employed him-but would seriously recommend them,
for the scribbler's sake, as well as their own, not to employ
him. The quantity of its money which the country at present
invests in scribbling is not, in the outcome of it, economically
spent; and even the highly ingenious person to whom this question
occurred, might perhaps have been more beneficially employed than
in printing it. 

12. I have to acknowledge an interesting communication on the
subject of free trade from Paisley (for a short letter from "A
Well-wisher" at my thanks are yet more due). But the Scottish
writer will, I fear, be disagreeably surprised to hear, that I
am, and always have been, an utterly fearless and unscrupulous
free-trader. Seven years ago, speaking of the various signs of
infancy in the European mind (Stones of Venice, vol. iii. p.
168), I wrote: "The first principles of commerce were
acknowledged by the English parliament only a few months ago, in
its free-trade measures, and are still so little understood by
the million, that no nation dares to abolish its custom-houses."
    It will be observed that I do not admit even the idea of
reciprocity. Let other nations, if they like, keep their ports
shut; every wise nation will throw its own open. It is not the
opening them, but a sudden, inconsiderate, and blunderingly
experimental manner of opening them, which does the harm. If you
have been protecting a manufacture for a long series of years,
you must not take the protection off in a moment, so as to throw
every one of its operatives at once out of employ, any more than
you must take all its wrappings off a feeble child at once in
cold weather, though the cumber of them may have been radically
injuring its health. Little by little, you must restore it to
freedom and to air.
    Most people's minds are in curious confusion on the subject
of free trade, because they suppose it to imply enlarged
competition. On the contrary, free trade puts an end to all
competition. "Protection" (among various other mischievous
functions,) endeavours to enable one country to compete with
another in the production of an article at a disadvantage. When
trade is entirely free, no country can be competed with in the
articles for the production of which it is naturally calculated;
nor can it compete with any other, in the production of articles
for which it is not naturally calculated. Tuscany, for instance,
cannot compete with England in steel, nor England with Tuscany in
oil. They must exchange their steel and oil. Which exchange
should be as frank and free as honesty and the sea-winds can make
it. Competition, indeed, arises at first, and sharply, in order
to prove which is strongest in any given manufacture possible to
both; this point once ascertained, competition is at an end. 

13. I should be glad if the reader would first clear the ground
for himself so far as to determine whether the difficulty lies in
getting the work or getting the pay for it. Does he consider
occupation itself to be an expensive luxury, difficult of
attainment, of which too little is to be found in the world? or
is it rather that, while in the enjoyment even of the most
athletic delight, men must nevertheless be maintained, and this
maintenance is not always forthcoming? We must be clear on this
head before going farther, as most people are loosely in the
habit of talking of the difficulty of "finding employment." Is it
employment that we want to find, or support during employment? Is
it idleness we wish to put an end to, or hunger? We have to take
up both questions in succession, only not both at the same time.
No doubt that work is a luxury, and a very great one. It is,
indeed, at once a luxury and a necessity; no man can retain
either health of mind or body without it. So profoundly do I feel
this, that, as will be seen in the sequel, one of the principal
objects I would recommend to benevolent and practical persons, is
to induce rich people to seek for a larger quantity of this
luxury than they at present possess. Nevertheless, it appears by
experience that even this healthiest of pleasures may be indulged
in to excess, and that human beings are just as liable to surfeit
of labour as to surfeit of meat; so that, as on the one hand, it
may be charitable to provide, for some people, lighter dinner,
and more work, for others, it may be equally expedient to provide
lighter work, and more dinner. 

14. Book I. chap. iv. s. 1. To save space, my future references
to Mr Mill's work will be by numerals only, as in this instance,
I. iv. I. Ed. in 2 vols. 8vo. Parker, 1848.

15. If Mr Mill had wished to show the difference in result
between consumption and sale, he should have represented the
hardware merchant as consuming his own goods instead of selling
them; similarly, the silver merchant as consuming his own goods
instead of welling them. Had he done this, he would have made his
position clearer, though less tenable; and perhaps this was the
position he really intended to take, tacitly involving his
theory, elsewhere stated, and shown in the sequel of this paper
to be false, that demand for commodities is not demand for
labour. But by the most diligent scrutiny of the paragraph now
under examination, I cannot determine whether it is a fallacy
pure and simple, or the half of one fallacy supported by the
whole of a greater one; so that I treat it here on the kinder
assumption that it is one fallacy only.

16. I take Mr Helps' estimate in his essay on War.

17. Also when the wrought silver vases of Spain were dashed to
fragments by our custom-house officers, because bullion might be
imported free of duty, but not brains, was the axe that broke
them productive? -- the artist who wrought them unproductive? Or
again. If the woodman's axe is productive, is the executioner's?
as also, if the hemp of a cable be productive, does not the
productiveness of hemp in a halter depend on its moral more than
on its material application?

18. Filigree: that is to say, generally, ornament dependent on
complexity, not on art.

19. These statements sound crude in their brevity; but will be
found of the utmost importance when they are developed. Thus, in
the above instance, economists have never perceived that
disposition to buy is a wholly moral element in demand: that is
to say, when you give a man half-a-crown, it depends on his
disposition whether he is rich or poor with it -- whether he will
buy disease, ruin, and hatred, or buy health, advancement, and
domestic love. And thus the agreeableness or exchange value of
every offered commodity depends on production, not merely of the
commodity, but of buyers of it; therefore on the education of
buyers, and on all the moral elements by which their disposition
to buy this, or that, is formed. I will illustrate and expand
into final consequences every one of these definitions in its
place: at present they can only be given with extremest brevity;
for in order to put the subject at once in a connected form
before the reader, I have thrown into one, the opening
definitions of four chapters; namely, of that on Value ("Ad
Valorem"); on Price ("Thirty Pieces"); on Production ("Demeter");
and on Economy ("The Law of the House").

20. Perhaps it may be said, in farther support of Mr Ricardo,
that he meant, "when the utility is constant or given, the price
varies as the quantity of labour." If he meant this, he should
have said it; but, had he meant it, he could have hardly missed
the necessary result, that utility would be one measure of price
(which he expressly denies it to be); and that, to prove
saleableness, he had to prove a given quantity of utility, as
well as a given quantity of labour: to wit, in his own instance,
that the deer and fish would each feed the same number of men,
for the same number of days, with equal pleasure to their
palates. The fact is, he did not know what he meant himself. The
general idea which he had derived from commercial experience,
without being able to analyze it, was, that when the demand is
constant, the price varies as the quantity of labour required for
production; or, -- using the formula I gave in last paper -- when
y is constant, x y varies as x. But demand never is, nor can be,
ultimately constant, if x varies distinctly; for, as price rises,
consumers fall away; and as soon as there is a monopoly (and all
scarcity is a form of monopoly; so that every commodity is
affected occasionally by some colour of monopoly), y becomes the
most influential condition of the price. Thus the price of a
painting depends less on its merits than on the interest taken in
it by the public; the price of singing less on the labour of the
singer than the number of persons who desire to hear him; and the
price of gold less on the scarcity which affects it in common
with cerium or iridium, than on the sunlight colour and
unalterable purity by which it attracts the admiration and
answers the trust of mankind.
    It must be kept in mind, however, that I use the word
"demand" in a somewhat different sense from economists usually.
They mean by it "the quantity of a thing sold." I mean by it "the
force of the buyer's capable intention to buy." In good English,
a person's "demand" signifies, not what he gets, but what he asks
for.
    Economists also do not notice that objects are not valued by
absolute bulk or weight, but by such bulk and weight as is
necessary to bring them into use. They say, for instance, that
water bears no price in the market. It is true that a cupful does
not, but a lake does; just as a handful of dust does not, but an
acre does. And were it possible to make even the possession of
the cupful or handful permanent, (i.e. to find a place for them,)
the earth and sea would be bought up for handfuls and cupfuls.

21. Compare George Herbert, The Church Porch, Staza 28.

22. "O Zeus dipou penetai" -- Arist. Plut. 582. It would but
weaken the grad words to lean on the preceding ones: -- "Oti tou
Platon parecho Beltionas, andpas, kai tin gnomen, kai ten idean."

23. Zech. v. ii.

24. Labour which is entirely good of its kind, that is to say,
effective, or efficient, the Greeks called "weighable," or axios,
translated usually "worthy," and because thus substantial and
true, they called its price time, the "honourable estimate" of it
(honorarium): this word being founded on their conception of true
labour as a divine thing, to be honoured with the kind of honour
given to the gods; whereas the price of false labour, or of that
which led away from life, was to be, not honour, but vengeance;
for which they reserved another word, attributing the exaction of
such price to a peculiar goddess, called Tisiphone, the "requiter
(or quittance-taker) of death"; a person versed in the highest
branches of arithmetic, and punctual in her habits; with whom
accounts current have been opened also in modern days. 

25. The most accurately nugatory labour is, perhaps, that of
which not enough is given to answer a purpose effectually, and
which, therefore, has all to be done over again. Also, labour
which fails of effect through non-co-operation. The cure of a
little village near Bellinzona, to whom I had expressed wonder
that the peasants allowed the Ticino to flood their fields, told
me that they would not join to build an effectual embankment high
up the valley, because everybody said "that would help his
neighbours as much as himself." So every proprietor built a bit
of low embankment about his own field; and the Ticino, as soon as
it had a mind, swept away and swallowed all up together. 

26. Observe, I say,  rearing," not "begetting." The praise is in
the seventh season, not in sporitos, nor in phutalia, but in
opora. It is strange that men always praise enthusiastically any
person who, by a momentary exertion, saves a life; but praise
very hesitatingly a person who, by exertion and self-denial
prolonged through years, creates one. We give the crown "ob civem
servatum"; -- why not "ob civem natum?" Born, I mean, to the
full, in soul as well as body. England has oak enough, I think,
for both chaplets. 

27. When Mr Mill speaks of productive consumption, he only means
consumption which results in increase of capital, or material
wealth. See I. iii. 4, and I. iii. 5. 

28. So also in the vision of the women bearing the ephah, before
quoted, "the wind was in their wings," not wings "of a stork," as
in our version; but "miivi," of a kite, in the Vulgate, or
perhaps more accurately still in the Septuagint, "hoopoe," a bird
connected typically with the power of riches by many traditions,
of which that of its petition for a crest of gold is perhaps the
most interesting. The "Birds" of Aristophanes, in which its part
is principal, are full of them; note especially the
"fortification of the air with baked bricks, like Babylon," I.
550; and, again, compare the Plutus of Dante, who (to show the
influence of riches in destroying the reason) is the only one of
the powers of the Inferno who cannot speak intelligibly and also
the cowardliest; he is not merely quelled or restrained, but
literally "collapses" at a word; the sudden and helpless
operation of mercantile panic being all told in the brief
metaphor, "as the sails, swollen with the wind, fall, when the
mast breaks."

29. The value of raw material, which has, indeed, to be deducted
from the price of the labour, is not contemplated in the passages
referred to, Mr. Mill having fallen into the mistake solely by
pursuing the collateral results of the payment of wages to
middlemen. He says" The consumer does not, with his own funds,
pay the weaver for his day's work. "Pardon me; the consumer of
the velvet pays the weaver with his own funds as much as he pays
the gardener. He pays, probably, an intermediate ship-owner,
velvet merchant, and shopman; pays carriage money, shop rent,
damage money, time money, and care money; all these are above and
beside the velvet price, (just as the wages of a head gardener
would be above the grass price). but the velvet is as much
produced by the consumer's capital, though he does not pay for it
till six months after production, as the grass is produced by his
capital, though he does not pay the man who mowed and rolled it
on Monday, till Saturday afternoon. I do not know if Mr. Mill's
conclusion, -- "the capital cannot be dispensed with, the
purchasers can " (p. 98), has yet been reduced to practice in the
City on any large scale.

30. Which, observe, is the precise opposite of the one under
examination. The hardware theory required us to discharge our
gardeners and engage manufacturers; the velvet theory requires us
to discharge our manufacturers and engage gardeners.

31. It is one very awful form of the operation of wealth in
Europe that it is entirely capitalists' wealth which supports
unjust wars. Just wars do not need so much money to support them;
for most of the men who wage such, wage them gratis; but for an
unjust war, men's bodies and souls have both to be bought; and
the best tools of war for them besides; which makes such war
costly to the maximum; not to speak of the cost of base fear, and
angry suspicion, between nations which have not grace nor honesty
enough in all their multitudes to buy an hour's peace of mind
with: as, at present, France and England, purchasing of each
other ten millions sterling worth of consternation annually, (a
remarkably light crop, half thorns and half aspen leaves, --
sown, reaped, and granaried by the "science" of the modern
political economist, teaching covetousness instead of truth.) And
all unjust war being supportable, if not by pillage of the enemy,
only by loans from capitalists, these loans are repaid by
subsequent taxation of the people, who appear to have no will in
the matter, the capitalists' will being the primary root of the
war; but its real root is the covetousness of the whole nation,
rendering it incapable of faith, frankness, or justice, and
bringing about, therefore, in due time, his own separate loss and
punishment to each person.

32. "In all reasoning about prices, the proviso must be
understood, 'supposing all parties to take care of their own
interest.'" -- Mill, III. i. 5.

33. James v. 4. Observe, in these statements I am not talking up,
nor countenancing one whit, the common socialist idea of division
of property; division of property is its destruction; and with it
the destruction of all hope, all industry, and all justice: it is
simply chaos a chaos towards which the believers in modern
political economy are fast tending, and from which I am striving
to save them. The rich man does not keep back meat from the poor
by retaining his riches; but by basely using them. Riches are a
form of strength; and a strong man does not injure others by
keeping his strength, but by using it injuriously. The socialist,
seeing a strong man oppress a weak one, cries out. -- "Break the
strong man's arms." but I say, "Teach him to use them to better
purpose." The fortitude and intelligence which acquire riches are
intended, by the Giver of both, not to scatter, nor to give away,
but to employ those riches in the service of mankind; in other
words, in the redemption of the erring and aid of the weak --
that is to say, there is first to be the work to gain money; then
the Sabbath of use for it -- the Sabbath, whose law is, not to
lose life, but to save. It is continually the fault or the folly
of the poor that they are poor, as it is usually a child's fault
if it falls into a pond, and a cripple's weakness that slips at a
crossing; nevertheless, most passers -- by would pull the child
out, or help up the cripple. Put it at the worst, that all the
poor of the world are but disobedient children, or careless
cripples, and that all rich people are wise and strong, and you
will see at once that neither is the socialist right in desiring
to make everybody poor, powerless, and foolish as he is himself,
nor the rich man right in leaving the children in the mire.

34. The quantity of life is the same in both cases; but it is
differently allotted.

35. The proper offices of middle-men, namely, overseers (or
authoritative workmen), conveyancers (merchants, sailors, retail
dealers, &c.), and order-takers (persons employed to receive
directions from the consumer), must, of course, be examined
before I can enter farther into the question of just payment of
the first producer. But I have not spoken of them in these
introductory papers, because the evils attendant on the abuse of
such intermediate functions result not from any alleged principle
of modern political economy, but from private carelessness or
iniquity.
